What is EC2

Web service that provides resizable compute capacity in the cloud.  AWS EC2 reduces time to boot new service instances to minutes, letting you quickly scale capacity up or down as needs change.

AWS Pricing philosophy:
    Pay as you go,
    pay for what you use,
    pay less as you use more,
    pay even less when you reserve capacity

EC2 On Demand
    Pay hourly rate no commitment
    Low cost, flexibility, no up-front payment
    Good for applications with short-term, spiky, or unpredictable workloads that can't be interrupted, or things on EC2 for the first time.

Reserved
    Reservation with a significant hourly discount, terms 1-3 years
    Good for Steady-state or predictable usage, things that need reserve capacity.
    Up-front payment reduces marginal costs.

    Types:
        Standard: up to 75% off vs on-demand.  More up front, longer contract = more savings.
        Convertible:
            Up to 54% off on-demand to change the attributes of RI, as long as the exchange creates reserved instances of equal or greater value.
        Scheduled:
            Available to launch in the time windows you reserve.  Match capacity reservation to predictable recurring schedule that only requires a fraction of a day, week, or month.
    Cannot be moved between regions.  Can choose specific AZ or entire region, but can't change region further.

Spot
    Bid what you want for instances, market rate moves up and down.  Good for flexible start/stop times.
    Useful for things that need cheap compute, things with urgent needs for new capacity.

Dedicated Hosts
    Physical EC2 server dedicated for you.  Reduce costs by letting you use server-bound licenses.
    Useful for regulatory requirements that may not support multi-tenant, like licenses.
    Can be purchased on-demand.
    Can be purchased as Reservation for up to 70% off.

Hypervisors used:
    Xen, Nitro

Instance types mnemonic:
F FPGA (programmable gateway architectures)
I IOPS
G Graphics
H High Disk Throughput
T Cheap general purpose (ex T2 Micro)
D Density
R RAM
M Main choice for general purpose apps
C Compute
P Graphics, ex Pics
X Extreme memory
Z Extreme Graphics and CPU
A ARM based workloads
U Bare Metal

EC2: Root devices are encryptable.  You can also use 3rd party tools like BitLocker to encrypt the root volume, or this can be done when creating APIs in the console or via API

Termination protection is OFF by default

On EBS-backed instances, the default action is Root EBS will be deleted when the instance is terminated.

Security groups: virtual firewalls that regulate access to EC2 instances.
Rule changes are immediate.
Security groups are stateful, NACLs are stateless.  For SGs, Inbound rules are mirrored with outbound rules; allowing HTTP in means HTTP is allowed out. All outbound traffic is allowed.

SGs can't blacklist IPs or ports; they have no DENY rules.  Things are blocked until they are allowed, and then they are just allowed.

You can attach multiple security groups to EC2 instances.  Adding also takes place immediately.

Have as many SGs as you want.


EBS: Elastic Block Store
    Persistent block storage volumes to use with EC2 instances in the cloud.  Each EBS volume is replicated within its AZ to protect from component failure, +availability + durability.

    Flavors:
        General Purpose (SSD) aka gp2
            Balance price and performance, best for web loads.
            Up to 16K IOPS
            1GiB to 16 TiB
        Provisioned IOPS (SSD) aka io1
            Designed for mission-critical applications, best for databases
            Up to 64K IOPS
        Throughput optimized hard drive aka st1
            Designed for frquently-accessed, throughput-intensive workloads
            Up to 500 IPS
            Big Data & Data Warehouse
        Cold HDD aka sc1
            Low cost HDD for less-frequently-accessed workloads
            Best for file servers
            250 IOPS
        Magnetic aka Standard
            Old gen HDD
            IOPS 40-200

    Additional, not-root volumes can be detached without stopping the EC2 instance, but it might take time.

EBS Volumes and Snapshots
    Wherever the EC2 instance is, the EBS volume will be in the same AZ.
    On volume resize, there is time to propagate, and you may need to repartition in the EC2 OS.
    Root EBS volume can be retyped and resized on the fly, but may take a couple min.
    Popular exam question: moving EBS volume to another AZ.
        How to do it:
            make a snapshot
            make an image
            best to use hardward-assisted virtualization type
            launch the AMI in a new AZ
    Copying AMI to another Region
        How to do it:
            Like above, but also copy the AMI to a new AZ
    On EC2 terminate, by default the root volume IS deleted, but any additional volumes are NOT
    Volumes exist on EBS.
    EBS is basically a virutal hard disk drive
    Snapshots exist on S3.
    Snapshots are point-in-time copies of volumes.
    Snapshots are incremental: only changed blocks are moved to s3
    First snapshots can take time to recreate.
    Best practice: stop instance before snapshotting
    CAN take a snap while the instance is running.
    Can create AMIs from snapshots
    Can change EBS volume sizes on the fly, including changing the size and storage type
    Volumes will always be in the same AZ as the EC2 instance.
    CANNOT delete snapshots of volumes used as root device of registered AMI

AMI types:
    EBS vs Instance store

    Can select AMI based on Region, OS, Architecture, Launch Perms, and Storage for root device.

    Can have Instance Store (EMPHEMERAL STORAGE)
    EBS-Backed Volume

    All AMIs are backed by either Instance Store or EBS-Backed Volume.
    Launched from EBS =  created from an EBS snapshot.
    Launched from Instance store =  root is instance store volume created from a template stored in s3

    Instance store volumes must be added on EC2 create, they can't be added later
    Instance-store-backed EC2 instances CAN'T be stopped.  If the hypervisor fails, you can't stop+start; you LOSE the data

    EBS-backed can be stopped, won't lose data.

    Can reboot both, not going to lose data

    By default both types get deleted if root storage on EC instance.  EBS-only you can choose not to have that happen.

ENI vs ENA vs EFA

ENI = Elastic Network Interface = virtual network card
    Allows:
        A primary IPv$ address from the range in your VPC
        1+ secondary IPv4 addresses from the range in your VPC
        1 Elastic IP IPv4 per private IPv4 address
        1 public IPv4 address
        1+ IPv6 addresses
        1+ security groups
        1 MAC address
        A source/dest check flag
        A description
    Scenarios for use:
        Create a management network
        Use network and security appliances in VPC
        Create dual-homed instances with workloads/roles on distinct subnets
        Create low-budget/HighA solution

EN = Enhanced Networking.  Uses single root i/o virtualization (SR-IOV) to provide
high-perf networking on supported instance types.
    Single-root IO virtualization for high-perf networking on supported types.  Method of device virt for higher I/O perf and lower CPU util compared to trad virt network interfaces

    Higher bandwidth, higher packet per second, consistently lower latency.  Not additional charge for enhanced networking

    Use for good network perf.

    Enable via Elastic Network Adapter (ENA), support speed up to 100 Gbps on supported types
    OR
    Intel 82599 Virtual Function (VF) interface, speed up to 10Gbps.  Typically used on older instances.

    In scenario question, ENA probable > VF.

Elastic Fabric Adapter = A network device you can attach to your EC2 instance to accelerate high-perf compute and machine learning apps

    Lower latency and higher throughput than TCP transport used in cloud-based HPC

    Can use OS-bypass; enables HPC and ML applications to bypass OS kernel and communicate directly with EFA device.  ++Faster, ++lower latency.  Only linux support.

Use cases:
    ENI:
        Basic networking.  Maybe separate management network, ex for logging, need low cost.  Use multiple ENIs for each network.

    EN:
        Speeds 10-100Gbps.  Need for high, reliable throughput.

    EFA:
        Accelerate high-performance computing or AI/ML, or need OS-bypass.

Root volumes can be encrypted at EC2 launch time.
To encrypt something after launch time, take a snap, then copy with encryption, then make an image, then launch an EC2 off that.

Can't take encrypted snapshot and launch it as not-encrypted.

Snapshots of encrypted volumes are encrypted automatically
Volumes restored from encrypted snapshots are too.
Snapshots can be shared, only if unencrypted

Cloudwatch:
    Monitors performance of applications and resources
    Examples:
        Compute
            Ec2 Instances
            Autoscaling groups
            Elastic Load Balancers
            Route53 Healt checks
        Storage and content delivery
            EBS Volumes
            Storage Gateways
            Cloudfront
    Host level metrics consist of:
        CPU
        Network
        Disk
        Status Check
            Ex hypervisor or underlying EC2
    Cloudwatch vs Cloudtrail
        Cloudtrail increases visibility of user and resource activity by recording console actions; it's about auditing
        Cloudtrail = big brother surveillance, Cloudwatch = personal trainer monitoring performance

    Will monitor events every 5min b default.  Can go to 1min with detailed monitoring
    Can create Cloudwatch alarms which trigger notifications

    Can create dashboards for visibility into environments
    Can create alarms for notification when thresholds are hit
    Events: help respond to state changes of resources
    Logs: Aggregate, monitor, and store logs

IAM Roles:
    Use em for resources.  Storing creds is bad, mkay.
    Easier to manage
    Can be assigned to EC2 instances via console or command line
    Roles are universal, useable in any region
    Can be attached to EC2 instances anytime without restriction

EC2 Bootstrap scripts
    Under "advanced detail", "user data" is a bootstrap script.  Ex:

    #!/bin/bash
    yum update -y
    yum install postgresql
    echo "Yeet"

Instance metadata
    User data and Metadata are available at 169.254.169.254/latest/{user|meta}-data

EFS = Elastic File System
    File storage service for EC2 instances.
    Create and configure filesystems
    Storage capacity is elastic, growing and shringking automatically as files are added/removed

    Like EBS, except EBS cannot be shared across EC2s.

    Requires adding NFS (port 2054) to the security group for the EC2 instances.
    Requires a mount command from the filesystems console
    Supports NFS v4
    Only pay for storage you use
    Can scale up to petabytes
    Can support 1000s of connections
    Data is stored across multiple AZs
    Read After Write consistency

FSX for Windows and WSX for Lustre
    FSX4W provides fully-managed native Windows filesystem, so move Windows-based applications that need storage to AWS.  Amazon FSx is built on Windows Server.

    vs EFS, FSx is
        Runs windows server message block based file servives
        Designed for Windows and Windows apps
        Supports AD users, ACLs, group and security policies, and Distributed File System (DFC) namespaces and replication.

        EFS is:
            Fully managed NSZ filer for EC2 instances based on NFSv4
            One of the first network file sharing protocols native to Linux/Unix.

FSx for Luster:
    Optimized for compute-intensive, like ML, video, HPC
    millions of iops, sub-millisecond latencies, distributed.  NOT windows

SMB = FSx for Windows
Lustre can store data directly on S3 as well

EC2 Placement Groups


Three kinds:
    Cluster
        A grouping of instances in a single AZ, for low lat, high throughput, or both
        Only certain instances can handle this.
        All eggs in one basket for fast networking
    Spread
        Good for small number of critical instances that should be separate.
        Think individual instances
        Separate racks, power.
        Eggs split up across baskets
    Partitioned
        Like spread, except you can have multiple instances together.
        Group is divided into partitions
        Each partition has own racks, network and power
        Isolate hardware failure
        Think multiple instances
        Use cases: HBase, Cassandra, etc

    Clustered can't span AZ, spread and partitioned can
    Name for placement group must be unique within AWS acct
    Only certain types of instances can be launched in a placement group (Compute Optimized, GPU, Memory Optimized, Storage Optimized)
    AWS recommends homogenous instances within clustered placement groups
    Can't merge placement groups
    CAN move instances into placement group.  Must be stopped.  Can use CLI or SDK, but not console yet.

WAF (Web Application Firewall)
    Monitor HTTP(S) requests that are forwarded to Cloudfront, API Gateway, or ALB
    Allow control of access to content
    Layer 7 aware firewall; can see querystrings, frex
    Can configure allowed IPs, required querystrings.  Then consumer allows receipt or gives 403

    Allows 3 behaviors:
        Allow all, block some
        Block all, allow some
        Count request matching specific properties (a passive mode)

    Protects against web attacks using conditions:
        IP
        Country of origin
        request headers
        strings in requests, specific or regex
        Length of requests
        Presence of SQL likely to be malicious
        Presence of script likely to be malicious

    Can also use NACLs for IP blocking
